create documentation microsite (#56)
disneystreaming/smithy4s: modules/docs/src/02-the-smithy-idl/01-smithy-idl.md

---
sidebar_label: Smithy IDL
title: The Smithy IDL
---

[Smithy](https://awslabs.github.io/smithy/) is a protocol agnostic definition language. It means that it is not tied to any transport or application protocol or serialisation mechanism, be that http, websockets, json, protobuf, etc.

> In order to achieve this, whilst still being useful, smithy separates the core-semantics from protocol-level concerns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to achieve this, whilst still being useful, smithy separates its core semantics from protocol-level concerns.
```

> The core-semantics contain means to concisely and simply express data models, as well as operations and services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core semantics contain means to concisely and simply express data models, as well as operations and services.
```

> The protocol level semantics are provided by means of an annotation mechanism. If some annotations are provided with the smithy language out of the box, in a "standard library" called prelude, the user is free to define their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol level semantics are provided by means of an annotation mechanism. Some annotations are provided with the smithy language out of the box, in a "standard library" called prelude, but users are free to define their own.
```

Annotations are called `traits` in smithy.

## The smithy metamodel

In this section, we'll list various available [shapes](https://awslabs.github.io/smithy/quickstart.html#shapes-and-traits) that let you define data and operations in smithy, and how they translate in the Scala code generated by smithy4s.

### Primitive types

Smithy provides the following "primitive" types out of the box.

* Boolean
* String
* Integer
* Long
* Float
* Short
* Double
* Byte
* BigInteger
* BigDecimal
* Blob (`schematic.ByteArray`, wrapper to `Array[Byte]`)
* Timestamp (`smithy4s.Timestamp`, translated from/to java or javascript time types)
* Document (`smithy4s.Document`, a bespoke Json ADT)

### Named primitives

> Smithy lets you define custom names for primitive types :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smithy lets you define custom names for primitive types:
```

```kotlin
namespace foo

integer Age
long Identifier
```

These get translated as unboxed type wrappers, or `newtypes`, that look like a case class but do not induce any boxing at runtiime.

### Collection types

> Smithy provides 3 different shapes of collections : lists, sets, and maps. They translate to the same, in the generated Scala code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smithy provides 3 different shapes of collections: lists, sets, and maps. They translate to the corresponding `scala.collection` types in the generated Scala code.
```

```kotlin
namespace foo

list IntList {
  member: Integer
}

set StringSet {
  member: Set
}

// At this time, only string shapes can be used as keys to map.
map AgeMap {
  key: String,
  value: Integer
}
```

### Structures

> Structures are product types. In scala, they naturally translate to case classes in Scala.

Author: ```suggestion
Structures are product types. In scala, they naturally translate to case classes.
```

> Structures are product types. In scala, they naturally translate to case classes in Scala.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Structures are product types. In Scala, they naturally translate to case classes. Do note that Smithy's structure fields are optional by default, and a `@required` trait annotation is necessary to opt out.
```

```kotlin
namespace foo

structure Person {
  @required
  firstName: String,
  @required
  lastName: String,
  dateOfBirth: Timestamp
}
```

### Unions

> Unions are coproduct types. In Scala, they quite naturally translate to sealed-traits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unions are coproduct types. In Scala, they quite naturally translate to sealed traits.
```

> Union members can target any data shape, be that a structure or a primitive type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Union members can target any data shape, be it a structure or a primitive type.
```

```kotlin
namespace foo

structure Cat {
  name: String
}

structure Dog {
  name: String
}

union Animal {
  cat: Cat,
  dog: Dog
}
```

### Operations and services

#### Operations

> Operations are essentially an optional Input, an optional Output, and a optional list of errors. Inputs, outputs and errors all have to be structure shapes.

Author: ```suggestion
Operations are essentially an optional Input, an optional Output, and an optional list of errors. Inputs, outputs and errors all have to be structure shapes.
```

```kotlin
namespace foo

operation Greet {
  input: GreetInput,
  output: GreetOutput,
  errors: [BadInput]
}

structure GreetInput {
  name: String
}

structure GreetOutput {
  message: String
}

@error("client")
structure BadInput {
  message: String
}
```

#### Errors

Regarding errors, `smithy4s` translates them as case classes extending `Throwable`. If the structure shape contains a `message` field, the `getMessage` method of the throwable is implemented in terms of this field.

#### Services

Services are basically a list of operations, and an optional list of errors.

```kotlin
namespace foo

service HelloService {
  operations: [Greet],
  errors: [ServerError]
}

@error("server")
structure ServerError {
  message: String
}
```

> Smithy4s translates them in the following fashion :

Author: ```suggestion
Smithy4s translates them in the following fashion:
```

> Smithy4s translates them in the following fashion :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smithy4s translates them in the following fashion:
```

Reviewer: I'd do a full sweep on all ` : ` and replace most like this :)

```scala
package foo

> trait HelloServiceGen[P[_, _, _, _, _]]{

Reviewer: I think we should be showing the monadic variant as the first one, since it'll be the major usecase (the only one at the moment, really)

  def greet(name: String) : P[GreetInput, Greet.Error, GreetOutput, Nothing, Nothing]

}
```

> P represents an abstractr context against which operations are going

Author: ```suggestion
P represents an abstract context against which operations are going
```

to run against. The abstact context has 5 type parameters:
* input,
* error,
* output,
* streamed input (Nothing, most of the time)
* streamed output (Nothing, most of the time)

Keeping track of these parameters is really important for intepreters. However, we are aware that the most common usecase of smithy4s abides by the "capatibility trait" pattern (or tagless-final), against effect types that abide by the cats-effect semantics.

Therefore, type aliases are provided in the package objects, that expose a normal "functor-shaped" type parameter.

```scala
package foo {

  type HelloService[F[_]] = HelloServiceGen[???]

}
```

### Currently **not** supported (in particular)

> Smithy has a `resource` type of shape, that represent CRUD specialised services. It is currently not supported in smithy4s.

Author: ```suggestion
Smithy has a `resource` type of shape, that represents CRUD specialised services. It is currently not supported in smithy4s.
```

> Smithy has a `resource` type of shape, that represent CRUD specialised services. It is currently not supported in smithy4s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smithy has a `resource` type of shape, that represents CRUD specialised services. It is currently not supported in smithy4s.
```

  name: String
}

structure Dog {
  name: String
}

union Animal {
  cat: Cat,
  dog: Dog
}
```

### Operations and services

#### Operations

Operations are essentially an optional Input, an optional Output, and an optional list of errors. Inputs, outputs and errors all have to be structure shapes.

```kotlin
namespace foo

operation Greet {
  input: GreetInput,
  output: GreetOutput,
  errors: [BadInput]
}

structure GreetInput {
  name: String
}

structure GreetOutput {
  message: String
}

@error("client")
structure BadInput {
  message: String
}
```

#### Errors

Regarding errors, `smithy4s` translates them as case classes extending `Throwable`. If the structure shape contains a `message` field, the `getMessage` method of the throwable is implemented in terms of this field.

#### Services

Services are basically a list of operations, and an optional list of errors.

```kotlin
namespace foo

service HelloService {
  operations: [Greet],
  errors: [ServerError]
}

@error("server")
structure ServerError {
  message: String
}
```

Smithy4s translates them in the following fashion:

```scala
package object foo {

  type HelloService[F[_]] = HelloServiceGen[???]

}
```

> `HelloService` is type alias that expose a normal "functor-shaped" type parameter: we are aware that the most common usecase of smithy4s abides by the "capatibility trait" pattern (or tagless-final), against effect types that probably abide by the cats-effect semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`HelloService` is type alias that exposes a normal "functor-shaped" type parameter: we are aware that the most common usecase of smithy4s abides by the "capatibility trait" pattern (or tagless-final), against effect types that probably abide by the cats-effect semantics.
```

> However, the actual interface is `HelloServiceGen`, which has a higher degree of polymorphism. It looks like this :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the actual interface is `HelloServiceGen`, which has a higher degree of polymorphism. It looks like this:
```
